VOTING INSTRUCTIONS

Fill out the appropriate ballot(s) below and mail it/them to me
<anton@mips.complang.tuwien.ac.at>.  Your vote will be published
(including your name (without email address) and/or the name of your
system) on <http://www.forth200x.org/traverse-wordlist.html>. You can
vote (or change your vote) at any time by mailing to me, and the
results will be published there.

Note that you can be both a system implementor and a programmer, so you
can submit both kinds of ballots.


CfV: TRAVERSE-WORDLIST
----------------------

Change Log:
-----------

20120120        First version
20120124        Minor typos, added section "Order of node visits"
                Added to section "Remarks"
20120125        Minor typos, cleanup and added remarks
20120203        Changed order of stack for TRAVERSE-WORDLIST
                to place the xt rightmost.
                Removed return value from TRAVERSE-WORDLIST.
                Changed xt-node halt flag to a continue flag.
                Note that if xt-node modifies the wordlist, the
                results are undefined.
                Specify NAME>... supporting words in section 2.2.
                Tidy up & correction of 4. Remarks
20120228        Section 2.1 and 2.2 moved and renumbered.
                Rename NAME>... to NAME>... to more clearly
                indicate a name token rather than a name.
                Tidy up table in section 3. Experience, and
                add note re NAME>... names.
                Corrected Bruce McFarling's moniker
20120904        Updates based on comments by Anton Ertl, Peter Knaggs,
                Bruce McFarling
20130725        Corrected stack signatures & reduce verbage
20130812        Updates based on commentary on CLF; NT>.. changed to
                NAME>...; justification for name token

Problem:
--------

There are no standard words in Forth for traversing a WORDLIST and
obtaining basic information about each node. While standard Forth
provides a great many features for extensibility of the language
(with CREATE ... DOES> being the classic example), standard Forth
lacks the basic capability of traversing the wordlist as a part of
the specification.

Such a capability is needed to provide some kinds of advanced
programming tools. For example, the programmer may want to determine
all instances of word name overlaps in all of the wordlists in the
current search order; or count, display or modify words contained in
a specific wordlist.

Many systems provide the TOOLS word WORDS that provides human-
readable output from the current wordlists in CONTEXT. TRAVERSE-
WORDLIST is a usable factor for the implementation of WORDS.

Solution:
---------

The proposal is the introduction of a new type and four new words,
primarily in section "15.6.2 Programming-Tools extension words" of
document "Forth 2012 RC1" dated 7th November, 2012.

The new type is a "name token" or nt. This is an opaque type returned
by  TRAVERSE-WORDLIST, which enables the programmer to enumerate the
contents of a wordlist (which are organised by name). Auxilliary
words allow the name token to be inspected, and to retrieve the name
string, and any associated intererpret and comiplation execution
tokens (xt).

Since this proposal introduces the concept of an opaque nt (name
token), the following words allow system independent reference to
specific parts of the node: NAME>STRING NAME>INTERPRET and
NAME>COMPILE .

Typical use:
------------

  : WORDS-COUNT ( x nt -- x' f ) DROP 1+ TRUE ;
  0 ' WORDS-COUNT WID TRAVERSE-WORDLIST . ( count of nodes visited)

prints x', where x' is a count of the total number of nodes in the
wordlist WID.

  : ALL-WORDS NAME>STRING CR TYPE TRUE ;
  ' ALL-WORDS GET-CURRENT TRAVERSE-WORDLIST

prints the names of words in the current compilation wordlist.

  : CONTAINS-STRING NAME>STRING 2OVER
      SEARCH IF CR TYPE THEN FALSE ;
  S" COM" ' CONTAINS-STRING GET-CURRENT TRAVERSE-WORDLIST

prints the name of a word containing the string "COM", if it exists,
and then terminates.


Remarks:
--------

There has been a heated debate on CLF as to whether the xt that
TRAVERSE-WORDLIST executes should be passed an nt (name token) or the
xt of the defined word. A name token has been chosen for the
following reasons:

1. The intention of TRAVERSE-WORDLIST is to return the names defined
in the wordlist, regardless of the xts with which they are associated.

2. A wordlist is organised by name, not by execution token.

3. It is possible to have multiple names for a single xt, and >NAME
(a common but non-standard mechanism for getting the name of an xt)
is not able to return any more than a single name.

4. Many systems employ multiple xts for each name. This is explictly
mentioned in the standard; FIND is permitted to return one xt while
in interpret state, and another while in compile state.

Proposal:
---------

TRAVERSE-WORDLIST ( i*x xt wid -- i*x' ) "traverse-wordlist" TOOLS-EXT

Remove wid and xt from the stack. Traverse the wordlist wid,
executing xt (a user-specified word) once for every word in
the wordlist.

The invoked xt has the stack diagram ( i*x nt -- i*x' f ).

A non-zero value for f will invoke the xt again with a new nt until
all the nodes in the wordlist have been exhausted. Setting f to zero
(FALSE) terminates this traversal, and xt will not be invoked again.

xt will not be invoked if the wordlist wid is empty.

nt is a system-specific name token for the node. The xt can use this
token to display, count, modify or perform any other action on the
node that the system providing nt permits. The format of nt is
opaque, but it is guaranteed to be unique for each word in the
wordlist.

Note: Use of the stack by TRAVERSE-WORDLIST

Removal of the xt and wid by TRAVERSE-WORDLIST before invoking the xt
ensures that the data stack is not blocked; it is not permitted to
maintain control information for the traversal on the data stack.
This is to allow parameters beyond the nt to be passed to xt. For
instance, the caller may wish to maintain a count of nodes visited on
the stack.

Note: Order of node visits

There are a number of orders in which nodes may be visited in a
wordlist, each of which depends on the specific implementation of
wordlists. Although they are often based on hash tables, no
assumptions are made in the specification about internal
implementations.

TRAVERSE-WORDLIST therefore gives no guarantee as to any specific
order of node visits to each word through the invoked xt with one
exception.

If a wordlist contains duplicate entries, SEARCH-WORDLIST and FIND
for a duplicated name will return the execution token of the last
temporally defined name. For instance

    : SAMPLE ... ( 1 ) ;
    : TEST ... ;
    : RETURNS ... ;
    : SAMPLE ... ( 2 ) ;
    : SAMPLE ... ( 3 ) ;

defines five words, one of which, SAMPLE, is defined three times.
SEARCH-WORDLIST and FIND will only return the last definition (3).
Whether duplicated nodes are visited or not by TRAVERSE-WORDLIST is
undefined. TRAVERSE-WORDLIST is only obliged to visit the nodes TEST,
RETURNS and SAMPLE (3) from the wordlist, and can do so in any order.

Some systems may permit visiting the node for the second and
subsequent definitions of SAMPLE. Exceptionally in this case,
TRAVERSE-WORDLIST must visit multiply defined nodes in the order
newest to oldest (but not necessarily consecutively); that is, SAMPLE
(3) must be returned before (2), and (2) before (1).

The remaining unique nodes can appear in any order, and may be
interspersed between the duplicately named and ordered words. If this
ordering is not possible, then TRAVERSE-WORDLIST must call xt with
only the FINDable definition of SAMPLE.

TRAVERSE-WORDLIST is affected by the operation of FORGET or MARKER,
and the results of a traversal must not return words that are
unFINDable after execution of FORGET or MARKER. Additionally, any
operation during the execution of xt-node that modifies the structure
of the wordlist (that is, defining words such as : (colon) or CREATE,
or execution of FORGET or MARKER) results in undefined behaviour.

Note: :NONAME, SYNONYM and ALIAS

:NONAME definitions have, by definition, no name. TRAVERSE-WORDLIST
will not return any nt for :NONAME definitions.

Because TRAVERSE-WORDLIST is returning name tokens, it is perfectly
possible that the nt shares an xt with some other word. Consider:

   SYNONYM NEW OLD

If NEW and OLD are both defined in wordlist wid, then nts for NEW and
OLD will be returned by TRAVERSE-WORLDLIST, and NAME>INTERPRET and
NAME>COMPILE may, depending on the implementation, return the same
corresponding xt for both NEW and OLD.

NAME>STRING    ( nt -- addr count ) "name-to-string"    TOOLS-EXT

NAME>STRING returns the string addr count, the definition name of the
word represented by nt. Case is dependent on the case-sensitivity of
the Forth system (see DPANS 3.3.1.2 Definition names). For
restrictions see /3.1 NAME>STRING Restrictions/

Note: NAME>STRING Restrictions

Implementations may choose to point to the string in the word's header
built when the word is defined: point to a static buffer that is
reused on each call; point to a dynamic buffer that is replaced on
each call: or some other method. Whatever technique is used, the
following are required of the string returned by NAME>STRING;

  The string is read-only; operations that write to the string are not
    permitted.
  Reading outside of the bounds (addr) to (addr+count) is not
    permitted.
  The lifetime of the string is only guaranteed up to the next call of
    NAME>STRING; subsequent calls to NAME>STRING must assume that a
    different address, length and contents will be returned.

If the string is needed outside of this lifetime, it must be copied to
another buffer. The alternative - providing a buffer for NAME>STRING's
used - has been rejected on the grounds that the buffer would have to
be of an unknown length. Although names of definitions are required
to be at least 31 characters in length (see /DPANS 3.3.1.2 Definition
names/) there is no specified upper limit.

NAME>INTERPRET ( nt -- xt )         "name-to-interpret" TOOLS-EXT

NAME>INTERPRET returns an xt (execution token) as discussed in
DPANS 3.4.3 Semantics. This xt represents the execution semantics
of the definition. It may be zero if there are no execution semantics.

NAME>COMPILE   ( nt -- w xt )       "name-to-compile"   TOOLS-EXT

xt has the following stack effect: ( i*x w -- j*x ).  EXECUTEing it
consumes w and performs the compilation semantics of the word
represented by xt.

Extend DPANS Table 3.1 Data Types

Symbol    Data type          Size on stack
nt        name token                1 cell

Add section DPANS 3.1.3.5 Name tokens

Different definitions have different name tokens, although
information obtainable from the token may be identical for different
name tokens; for instance, NAME>STRING for different values of nt may
return the same string.

Reference implementation:
-------------------------

Implementation of TRAVERSE-WORDLIST requires carnal knowledge of the
structure of the wordlist. The following example assumes that the
wordlist is a singly linked list, anchored at wid, with the name token
at a cell offset.

    : traverse-wordlist ( i*x xt wid -- i*x' )
        begin @ dup
        while
          2dup 2>r
          cell + swap execute ( i*x nt -- i*x' f )
          2r> rot
        while repeat then 2drop ;

Testing:
--------

Not completed.

Experience:
-----------

The wordlist traversal functionality is available through very
similar words in

  WF32          TRAVERSE-WORDLIST
  Win32Forth    VOC-ITERATE
  VFX           WalkWordList
  iForth        doWORDS
  ciForth       FOR-WORDS
  lxf/ntf       WALK-WORDLIST

Commonly used to implement WORDS, these functions and others are
individual solutions with conflicting stack requirements and names.
However, all provided similar functionality to the proposed TRAVERSE-
WORDLIST, namely, the ability to inspect the individual entries in a
wordlist.

Comments:
---------





Ballot for systems
------------------

If you maintain several systems, please mention the systems separately
in the ballot. Insert the system name or version between the brackets
or in the line below the statement. Multiple hits for the same system
are possible (if they do not conflict).

[ ] conforms to ANS Forth.
[ ] already implements the proposal in full since release [ ].
[ ] implements the proposal in full in a development version.
[ ] will implement the proposal in full in release [ ].
[ ] will implement the proposal in full in some future release.
[ ] There are no plans to implement the proposal in full in [ ].
[ ] will never implement the proposal in full.

If you want to provide information on partial implementation, please do
so informally, and I will aggregate this information in some way.

Ballot for programmers
----------------------

Just mark the statements that are correct for you (e.g., by putting
your name on the line below the statement you agree with). If some
statements are true for some of your programs, but not others, please
mark the statements for the dominating class of programs you write.

[ ] I have used (parts of) this proposal in my programs.
[ ] I would use (parts of) this proposal in my programs if the systems
    I am interested in implemented it.
[ ] I would use (parts of) this proposal in my programs if this
    proposal was in the Forth standard.
[ ] I would not use (parts of) this proposal in my programs.

If you feel that there is closely related functionality missing from
the proposal (especially if you have used that in your programs),
make an informal comment, and I will collect these, too. Note that
the best time to voice such issues is the RfD stage.

Author: Alex McDonald
Votetaker: Anton Ertl
