Present:

Anton Ertl
Andrew Haley (from 21st 4:45pm)
Peter Knaggs
Bernd Paysan
Stephen Pelc (plus proxy vote from Willem Botha)
Bill Stoddart (from 22nd afternoon)
Carsten Strotmann (observer)
Leon Wagner
Gerald Wodni (absent on morning 22nd until 11:15)

Minutes:
Accepted minutes of last meeting: 7Y/0/0

Snapshot:
Stephen Pelc proposes taking what we have and using it as a snapshot:

We commit to use the 10.2 document with the changes from this meeting
as the 2011-rc1 snapshot document, with no normative changes except
for those resulting from feed back from the public review process.  7Y/0/0

Discussion about whether to go through ANSI: stick to ANSI procedures,
but don't go through the organization for now (may change after
commercial reasons require it).


Review of the document:

Discussion about whether the reference implementations should be
included in the document.

Legacy: Finetuning of the wording of the rationale for FORGET.

Reference Forth-94 as "Forth 94" and define somewhere what document
this refers to.

Correct section numbering for Extension queries and Obsolescent
Environmental Queries in Annex A.

Fine-Tuning of the wording of the rationale Obsolescent Environmental
Queries.

X:structures2: correct stack-effects to use the correct address types;
some discussion about whether it should not be, e.g., u|df_addr (or x)
in order to accomodate the usage for computing offsets, but eventually
decided against it (for aesthetic and clarity reasons).  Rationale for
FIELD: add stack comments and remove the other comments to
implementations.

4. Consideration of proposals

X:enhanced-locals: some wordsmithing of the Rationale
   accept with revised Rationale: 7Y/0/0

X:buffer: discussion about alignment issues (deferred)
   wordsmithing of Rationale
   vote: 7Y/0/0

X:text-substitution:
   added restrictions to REPLACES (reflecting implementation practice)
   Rationale will come from Intro of proposal
   Vote 8Y/0/0

5. Considerations of draft proposals.

X:is
   Rewordings. 8Y/0/0

FOUND:
   Addresses a problem that exists, but the proposed solution was not
   favourably received by the committee.  Some response was written by
   the TC.  Actually having this proposal in this section is a mistake
   (it was not submitted as CfV).

Multi-tasking Block Buffers: Minor wordsmithing, then the suggested
   (non-normative) change was accepted: 9Y/0/0.

SOURCE-ID discussion: Implementations that slurp/mmap on including are
   standard; programs cannot rely on file positions for files that are
   being text interpreted, nor that changing the file position has any
   particular effect.

6. Considerations of Snapshot Candidate Release

a) Numbering of new words: 8Y/0/0

b) Removal of extension queries:
   Adjusted for number prefixes (optional)
   Vote: 9Y/0/0

c) Remove Annex F (reference implementations); they are available
   through the Forth200x web site in a separate document.  9Y/0/0

d) Remove Annex G (test suite); it is available through the Forth200x
   web site in a separate document.  9Y/0/0

e) Remove the change log (to be replaced with a summary in another
   Annex).  9Y/0/0

f) Annex C: Remove it.  It is somewhat dated and everyone who reads
   the standard knows Forth.  9Y/0/0

g) Annex D: Remove most of it and replace it with a summary of the
   changes from Forth-94.  Action: PK; 9Y/0/0

h) Annex E.  Revise it.  Action: AE

Remove description of proposal process.

7) Progress Reports:

a) Text Substitution: Done

b) I18n: Dependent on Text substitution, now progress is possible

c) Cross compiler: A little bit to report

d) IEEE FP: Nothing to report.  Requires a lot of work.

e) File Names and Directories: SP reports that this can be implemented
   in his embedded native FAT file system implementation, so we may
   approach consensus.

f) Directories: Maybe progress from having text substitution.  SP
   reports that VFX now does source-relative directories through a
   text substitution macro %idir%.

g) Memory access: some discussion


8. Matters arising

Documentation requirements: AE will produce a version that removes
most of it; ambiguous conditions are collected in an Annex.

Compliance and Labeling: PK will move extensions from other chapters
   into a table here.

Incomplete xchars in I/O: consensus that this should work.  BP is to
   draft a response.


9. Next meeting

If the snapshot-rc1 is released in 2011, we will have a spring meeting
   in NL.  In any case we will have a meeting at the next EuroForth.
