Attendance:
Leon Wagner
Andrew Haley
Willem Botha
Gerald Wodni
Bernd Paysan
Ulrich Hoffmann
Anton Ertl
Willi Stricker
Stephen Pelc
Peter Knaggs

Voting:
Willi Stricker is allowed to Vote: 9Y:0:0

2. Minutes of last meeting
    2 amendments to draft minutes
    accepted with these two amendments 10Y:0:0

3. Review of Forth 2011.1
   Discussion including various proposals for minor changes

7. Consideration of the Candidate Release
   a) Review of rc0
   b,c,d,f) Chapter 5, Annex B, Annex E is left unchanged, Annex C is
      deleted 10Y:0:0
   e) Annex D
     D.1-D.6 written by Peter Knaggs and accepted 10Y:0:0
     D.7 written by Peter Knaggs and Anteon Ertl and accepted
     D.8 Use list of new words written by Peter Knaggs; accepted
   f) Started revision of Annex E, deferred the rest to Leon Wagner

4. Consideration of proposals (CfV)

   a) S-to-F
      Discussion about F>S (overspecified in CfV)
        Bernd Paysan drafts a new specification based on F>D
     accepted the proposal with Bernd Paysan's F>S specification 

5. Consideration of draft proposals (RfDs)

   

6. Wording changes
   Discussion of wording change proposed for SUSTITUTE 10Y:0:0
   Rationale of PARSE cleaned up 10Y:0:0

9. Matters arising
 TO Rationale revised
 Wording changes: Occurences of "via" and "assign" examined and often revised
 Address arithmetic: Revise stack effects
 Revised Annex A (mostly deletion of differences between Forth-83 and -94;
   read Forth-94 if you want that)
 A.18: Bernd Paysan will write rationale for the words of the xchar wordset
 
 How to proceed: There will be a draft (12) and a Snapshot release
 candidate (rc1) ideally released by SVFig Forth Day (there needs to
 be a committee vote first).  Then a 6-month review period; any
 responses should be made through a bug tracker, get assigned to a
 committee member for drafting a response, and eventually committe
 consensus for the response.

 Formal standards body: Discussion on whether we shout get the
 blessing of a formal standards body.  There is no enthusiasm for
 that, but no decision was taken.

